v5.6.0 (#4078)
mui/mui-x: CHANGELOG.md

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 5.6.0

_Mar 3, 2022_

A big thanks to the 15 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

> - 📦 Use the bundling scripts as the packages published by the [https://github.com/mui/material-ui](material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: I'm not sure if the users care enough for this to be highlight?

Author: Maybe it's reassuring. It will work the same way that the other library they are using.

But I agree the most important part is in the explanation below. Maybe for the tweet, we should only talk about the tree shaking

Author: Already asked for the banner

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 📦 Use the same bundling scripts as the packages published by the [https://github.com/mui/material-ui](material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle
```

Reviewer 3: I could be wrong, but I think it might be more grammatically correct to say that the package is published _in_ the repository, _by_ the maintainers of that repo.

Author: What about a more straightforward?

```suggestion
- 📦 Use the bundling scripts as in [material-ui](https://github.com/mui/material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle
```

  The code structure and the bundling strategy have been modified to provide a better isolation between components.

>   This brings tree shaking, allowing to reduce the bundle size. 🏋

Reviewer: This is much more interesting for the user. Probably IT can be a higlight?

  Such modification is always a bit risky.
  If you encounter problems with your build, please open an issue.
  These issues will have high priority.

- 🧼 Clean and document the columns selector (#4010) @flaviendelangle

  To improve clarity, columns selectors have been renamed.
  Old naming are deprecated, and will be removed in v6.
  Here is the renaming and the modification needed to get same information with new selectors.

  |Previews naming|New naming|  

>   |---|---|

Reviewer 2: Could you format the table extending the width of the largest column? Although it works on GitHub UI, it doesn't look good when reading the CHANGELOG in a text editor. https://www.tablesgenerator.com/markdown_tables helps.

Author: I used https://markdownbeautifier.com 

But I'm surprised that even I put the table in the `docs` folder it is not pretiffied by `yarn prettier`

  |`allGridColumnsFieldsSelector` | `gridColumnFieldsSelector`|
  |`allGridColumnsSelector` | `gridColumnDefinitionsSelector`|
  |`visibleGridColumnsSelector` | `gridVisibleColumnDefinitionsSelector`|
  |`filterableGridColumnsSelector` | `gridFilterableColumnDefinitionsSelector`|

  ```diff

>   - const { all, lookup, columnVisibilityModel } = gridColumnsSelector(apiRef)

Reviewer 2: `git diff` doesn't add a space after `+` and `-`

```suggestion
  -const { all, lookup, columnVisibilityModel } = gridColumnsSelector(apiRef)
```

x other lines.

  + const all = gridColumnFieldsSelector(apiRef)
  + const lookup = gridColumnLookupSelector(apiRef)
  + const columnVisibilityModel = gridColumnVisibilityModelSelector(apiRef)

  - const filterableFields = filterableGridColumnsIdsSelector(apiRef);
  + const lookup = gridFilterableColumnLookupSelector(apiRef);
  + const filterableFields = gridColumnFieldsSelector(apiRef).filter(field => lookup[field]);
  
  - const visibleColumnsNumber = visibleGridColumnsLengthSelector(apiRef);
  + const visibleColumnsNumber = gridVisibleColumnDefinitionsSelector(apiRef).length;

  - const { totalWidth, positions } = gridColumnsMetaSelector(apiRef);
  + const totalWidth = gridColumnsTotalWidthSelector(apiRef);
  + const positions = gridColumnPositionsSelector(apiRef);
  ```

- 📚 Documentation improvements
- 🐞 Bug and typo fixes

### `@mui/x-data-grid@v5.6.0` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v5.6.0`

#### Changes

- [DataGrid] Add slot for filter panel delete icon (#4069) @Hameezr

> - [DataGrid] Add specific label for linkOperator (#3915) @alexfauquette

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Add specific label for `linkOperator` (#3915) @alexfauquette
```

- [DataGrid] Allow for truncated and multiline content in grid cells (#3955) @DanailH
- [DataGrid] Allow to navigate between cells with keyboard once inside an `actions` column (#3375) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Fix desynchronization between rows and header when sorting (#4058) @alexfauquette
- [DataGrid] Clean and document the columns selector (#4010) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Differentiate the Pro and Community versions of `GridState`, `GridApi` and `GridApiRef` (#3648) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Fix horizontal scroll not working on empty grid (#3821) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Fix input element in custom header (#3624) @alexfauquette
- [DataGrid] Improve `singleSelect` filter performance (#3956) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Improve custom overlay slots positioning (#3832) @cherniavskii

> - [DataGrid] Improve flex implementation (#4006) @cherniavskii

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Make `flex` implementation match the W3C standard (#4006) @cherniavskii
```

- [DataGrid] Improve the invalid `sortModel` and `filterModel` warnings (#3671) @flaviendelangle

> - [DataGrid] Memoize Popper modifiers passed to panel (#3975) @m4theushw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Memoize `Popper` modifiers passed to panel (#3975) @m4theushw
```

> - [DataGrid] Prevent focus while Popper is not fully positioned (#4067) @m4theushw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Prevent focus while `Popper` is not fully positioned (#4067) @m4theushw
```

- [DataGrid] Remove padding from the header title (#3691) @valenfv

> - [DataGrid] Re-use previous `rowNode` when building tree and the new `rowNode` is equal to the previous one (#3961) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Reuse previous `rowNode` when building tree and the new `rowNode` is equal to the previous one (#3961) @flaviendelangle
```

- [DataGrid] Remove last filter item when no value to clean and close the filter panel (#3910) @alexfauquette
- [DataGrid] Send warning when the `rowCount` is not provided while using server pagination (#3902) @alexfauquette
- [DataGrid] Stop checkbox ripple on blur (#3835) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Use only `headerName` when available to search column (#3959) @pkratz

> - [DataGrid] Use the bundling scripts as the packages published by the [https://github.com/mui/material-ui](material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Use the bundling scripts as the packages published by the [https://github.com/mui/material-ui](material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Stop calling `onRowClick` when clicking in cells with interactive elements (#3929) @m4theushw
```

- [DataGridPro] Always export the `pageSize` and `page` when it has been initialized or is being controlled (#3908) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGridPro] Disable export for detail panel column (#4057) @gustavhagland
- [DataGridPremium] Support `valueFormatter` on the grouping column (#4022) @flaviendelangle
- [l10n] Improve Bulgarian (bg-BG) locale (#3949) @DanailH
- [l10n] Improve German (de-DE) locale (#4077) @sebastianfrey
- [l10n] Improve Hebrew (he-IL) locale (#3930) @ColdAtNight

### Docs

- [docs] Add example of custom operator based on built-in ones (#3911) @flaviendelangle
- [docs] Avoid crash in demos using row grouping and custom formatted cells (#4065) @m4theushw
- [docs] Fix `Commodity` and `Employee` CSV export of the `country` column (#3912) @DanailH
- [docs] Fix links to the GitHub repository (#4005) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Fix typo (#3923) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Fix typo (#4016) @MathisBurger
- [docs] Fix typo in client-side validation example (#4066) @krallj
- [docs] Remove useless hide id column (#4021) @alexfauquette

### Core

- [core] Allows to add custom export item (#3891) @alexfauquette

> - [core] Drop `_modules_` folder (#3953) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [core] Remove the `_modules_` folder (#3953) @flaviendelangle
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 5.6.0

_Mar 3, 2022_

> A big thanks to the 15 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

Reviewer 3: Let's make this a complete sentence.

```suggestion
We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 15 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:
```

Author: We always write the same introduction. I'm adding the modification to the changelog generator such that future message will get the modification too

> - 📦 Use the bundling scripts as in [material-ui](https://github.com/mui/material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 3: I think @m4theushw suggested adding "same" in here which I agree with. I've also added a small grammatical fix.

```suggestion
- 📦 Use the same bundling scripts as those in the [material-ui](https://github.com/mui/material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle
```

  The code structure and the bundling strategy have been modified to provide better isolation between components.

>   This brings tree shaking, allowing to reduce the bundle size. 🏋

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This brings tree shaking to reduce the bundle size. 🏋
```

Author: @flaviendelangle I'm not sure, does the bundle size is already reduced, or will we need to take other actions to reduce it?

Reviewer 4: How about?

```suggestion
  The bundle size is slightly reduced, but with tree shaking, the doors are open for significant gains in the future.
```

  Such modification is always a bit risky.
  If you encounter problems with your build, please open an issue.
  These issues will have high priority.

> - 🧼 Clean and document the columns selector (#4010) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- 🧼 Clean and document the column selectors (#4010) @flaviendelangle
```

>   Columns selectors have been renamed to improve clarity.

Reviewer 3: "Column" should be singular here.

```suggestion
  Column selectors have been renamed to improve clarity.
```

>   To improve clarity, columns selectors have been renamed.

Reviewer 3: Let's put the most important point right at the start of the sentence.

```suggestion
Columns selectors have been renamed to improve clarity.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't know if it was a typo in the suggestion but if the line is part of the list item we need to keep the leading two spaces:

```suggestion
  Columns selectors have been renamed to improve clarity.
```

Reviewer 3: My mistake there!

>   Old namings are deprecated and will be removed in v6.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The old names have been deprecated and will be removed in v6.
```

>   Here is the renaming and the modification needed to get the same information with new selectors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Here are the new names and the modifications needed to get the same information with the new selectors.
```

>   | Previews naming                 | New naming                                |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  | Old name                 | New name                                |
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 5.6.0

> _Mar 3, 2022_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Mar 4, 2022_
```

We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 15 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- 📦 Use the same bundling scripts as those in the [material-ui](https://github.com/mui/material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle

  The code structure and the bundling strategy have been modified to provide better isolation between components.
  This brings tree shaking, allowing to reduce the bundle size. 🏋

>   Such modification is always a bit risky.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  We predict that such modifications could potentially impact edge cases.
```

  If you encounter problems with your build, please open an issue.

>   These issues will have high priority.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  These issues will have high priority to mitigate the risk.
```

>   These issues will have high priority.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  These issues will have high priority as part of our risk mitigation strategy.
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 5.6.0

_Mar 3, 2022_

A big thanks to the 15 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

> - 📦 Use the same bundling scripts as the core repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 5: I think we should avoid to talk about "core" to talk about "the core team" on public content.

```suggestion
- 📦 Use the bundling scripts as the non-X packages (#3965) @flaviendelangle
```

Or

```suggestion
- 📦 Use the bundling scripts as the `@mui/material` package (#3965) @flaviendelangle
```

Or

```suggestion
- 📦 Use the bundling scripts as the packages published by the [https://github.com/mui/material-ui](material-ui) repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle
```

Author: I took the last option

  The code structure and the bundling strategy has been modified to have a better isolation between components.

>   This brings tree shaking, allowing us to reduce the bundle size. 🏋
>   Such modification are always a bit risky.
>   If you encounter problems with you build, please open an issue.
>   We will put high priority on investigating them.

Reviewer 2: Avoid "we".

```suggestion
  This brings tree shaking, allowing to reduce the bundle size. 🏋
  Such modification is always a bit risky.
  If you encounter problems with your build, please open an issue.
  These issues will have high priority.
```

- 📚 Documentation improvements
- 🐞 Bug and typo fixes

### `@mui/x-data-grid@v5.6.0` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v5.6.0`

#### Changes

- [DataGrid] Add slot for filter panel delete icon (#4069) @Hameezr
- [DataGrid] Add specific label for linkOperator (#3915) @alexfauquette
- [DataGrid] Allow for truncated and multiline content in grid cells (#3955) @DanailH
- [DataGrid] Allow to navigate between cells with keyboard once inside an `actions` column (#3375) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Fix desynchronization between rows and header when sorting (#4058) @alexfauquette

> - [DataGrid] Clean and document the columns selector (#4010) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 5: Should we highlight the deprecation to provide migration example ?

Reviewer 2: If they were not documented before deprecation I don't think we need to mention.

Author: If #4056 is merged the migration will be provided in the warning so we could avoid it. I don't have a strong opinion on this topic. 

For now, migration guides are ready, removing should not take too long

Reviewer 4: So, as I understand the highlight is already present (current starting on line 20), right?
+1 for leaving it.

Reviewer 5: @m4theushw in the future I agree that not documented = no problem
But for the selectors, until a few weeks ago, none were documented but a lot were used in the demos, so I think it's a situation where we should deprecate and communicate about the deprecation.

> - [DataGrid] Differentiate the pro and community versions of `GridState`, `GridApi` and `GridApiRef` (#3648) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Differentiate the Pro and Community versions of `GridState`, `GridApi` and `GridApiRef` (#3648) @flaviendelangle
```

- [DataGrid] Fix horizontal scroll not working on empty grid (#3821) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Fix input element in custom header (#3624) @alexfauquette
- [DataGrid] Improve `singleSelect` filter performance (#3956) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Improve custom overlay slots positioning (#3832) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Improve flex implementation (#4006) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Improve the invalid `sortModel` and `filterModel` warnings (#3671) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Memoize Popper modifiers passed to panel (#3975) @m4theushw

> - [DataGrid] Padding removed from header title (#3691) @valenfv

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Remove padding from the header title (#3691) @valenfv
```

- [DataGrid] Remove last filter item when no value to clean and close the filter panel (#3910) @alexfauquette
- [DataGrid] Send warning when the `rowCount` is not provided while using server pagination (#3902) @alexfauquette
- [DataGrid] Stop checkbox ripple on blur (#3835) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Use only `headerName` when available to search column (#3959) @pkratz
- [DataGrid] Use the same bundling scripts as the core repository (#3965) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGridPro] Add `unstable_setRowHeight` method to `apiRef` (#3751) @cherniavskii
- [DataGridPro] Always export the `pageSize` and `page` when it has been initialized or is being controlled (#3908) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGridPro] Disable export for detail panel column (#4057) @gustavhagland
- [DataGridPremium] Support `valueFormatter` on the grouping column (#4022) @flaviendelangle
- [l10n] Improve Bulgarian (bg-BG) locale (#3949) @DanailH
- [l10n] Improve German (de-DE) locale (#4077) @sebastianfrey
- [l10n] Improve Hebrew (he-IL) locale (#3930) @ColdAtNight

### Docs

- [docs] Add example of custom operator based on built-in ones (#3911) @flaviendelangle

> - [docs] Avoid crash when grouping rows from the `Commodity` dataset (#4065) @m4theushw

Reviewer 2: I didn't use the PR title for the commit, my bad.

```suggestion
- [docs] Avoid crash in demos using row grouping and custom formatted cells (#4065) @m4theushw
```

- [docs] Fix `Commodity` and `Employee` CSV export of the `country` column (#3912) @DanailH

> - [docs] Fix links to github repository (#4005) @oliviertassinari

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [docs] Fix links to the GitHub repository (#4005) @oliviertassinari
```
